# Overview 
This repository contains the analysis scripts for the manuscript Ancestral state reconstruction with discrete characters using deep learning by Anna A. Nagel and Michael J. Landis. 
Many of the scripts are written to be run on a cluster without using a job scheduling system. 
The training of the neural networks make use of GPUs when they are available.  

# Required software
- phyddle  (Requires the devAncState branch commit 880e99b, https://github.com/mlandis/phyddle/tree/devAncState)
- RevBayes (development branch) (https://github.com/revbayes/revbayes)
- TensorPhylo (https://bitbucket.org/mrmay/tensorphylo/src/master/)
- R
- R packages: ape, castor, diversitree, phytools, dispRity, extraDistr, coda, caret, wrapr, ggplot2, ggpubr, patchwork, R.utils, cowplot, rhdf5, viridis
- Python package masterpy
- MASTER add on to BEAST 2. 
- pdfcrop (for some of the plotting)

Many of the R packages are only required for plotting, but some are also used for simulation and analysis. 

## Documentation
Phyddle documentation for ancestral state reconstruction is available on github devAncState branch at https://github.com/mlandis/phyddle/tree/devAncState/docs/build/html. 
This will be merged into the main documentation in the future.

# To reproduce the results
Most of simulations proceed as follows: 
- Simulate a dataset using phyddle
- Format the data, train a neural network, and estimate ancestral states using phyddle. 
- Format files for RevBayes analysis for a subset of the datasets generated by phyddle. 
- Infer ancestral states using RevBayes. 
- (Sometimes) combine or reformat output using bash.
- Compare the performance and plot result using R. 


## 4 tip trees
Navigate to the directory, `asr_phyddle/4_tip`. 

In the `3_bin` directory, run
```
./accuracy_script.sh
```
This trains two neural networks with a dataset of 50,000 trees. 
The ancestral states are estimated as 3 binary variables.
It creates an additional dataset and estimates ancestral states for the new dataset as well. 

Then, run the following scripts.
The first matches the ordering of the nodes in phyddle to the order in the original tree. 
It is needed for the performance summaries. 
The second combines the true ancestral states into a single file for the first 2500 datasets.
```
./fixOrder.sh
./sum.sh
```

To run the Bayesian analyses, 
```
cd bayes
./runRb.sh
```
This will run 2500 pairs of MCMCs in parallel. 
The convergence can be checked with `convergence.R`.

Then, navigate back to the directory `asr_phyddle/4_tip/one` and run the following.
```
./runCmd.sh
```
This will train two neural networks as well as estimate ancestral states for a larger dataset.
The ancestral state for a single node is estimated for each dataset.


In the `8_cat` directory, run the following
```
./cmd.sh
```
This trains two neural networks with the same dataset and estimate ancestral states with them. 
Ancestral states are treated as a categorical variable with 8 states. 

The plots can be created with `plot_prob.R` and `heatMap.R`. The accuracies are calculated with `test_accuracy.R`.

## Markov model of a binary character
### Phyddle analyses
Navigate to the directory, `asr_phyddle/mk_binary`. 
Then, run the following line to prepare the config files for phyddle
```
./prepareFiles.sh
```
This will create 6 `config.py` files, which correspond to fixed and variable size trees of up to 50, 100, or 200 tips. 
Then, nagivate to each directory and run a phyddle analysis with each of the 6 `config.py` files. 
For example, 
```
cd fix/50
phyddle -s SFTEP 
```
Once all analyses have been completed, run the script `runAllSummary.sh` from both the `fix` and `var` directories. 

Phyddle should also be run in the `fix/50_unequal_q` directory, using the same command as above.
These runs are for comparison with the BiSSE model in the next section. 

Start by navigating to the `asr_phyddle/mk_binary` directory. 
Then, run the script to summarize the outputs. 
This will generate several of files in each of the analysis directories.
```
cd fix 
../runAllSummary.sh

cd 50_unequal_q/
runAllSummary.sh

cd ../../var
../runAllSummary.sh
```
These scripts may take over an hour to run. 
They are written to run in parallel and use 100 threads. 

### Bayesian analyses
To run the Bayesian analyses, first create the input files. 
```
./mkAllNexus.sh
```
Then, run the RevBayes analyses. This scripts infers ancestral states for the first 2500 simulated tree for each of the 6 datasets. 
Two MCMCs are run for each tree. 
This will take hours and is parallelized. 

```
# Runs the analyses in parallel
./runRbParallel.sh
```
The RevBayes path in `runSetRb.sh` may need to be updated to match the location of the `rb` executable. 

The output of the analyses is combined into a csv file
```
./parseBayes.sh
```

The same steps should be repeated for the `fix/50_unequal_q/bayes`. 
```
./mkAllNexus.sh
./runRbParallel.sh
./parseOutput.sh
```

To perform ASR on trees from a different test dataset on a network trained under broader conditions, navigate to the `mk_binary_var` directory and run the following.
```
./prepareSizeExp.sh
```

Once the runs are completed, the convergence can be assessed. 
```
R convergence.R
```
The plots can be recreated using `makeAllPlots.R`.
The paths the plots are saved to will need to be updated for the script to run without error. 

### Root state alone
Within the `mk_binary/fix` directory, the typical phyddle command, as shown below should be run in the directories `50`, `100`, and `200`. 
```
phyddle -s SFTEP 
```
This will estimate the root state as a single categorical variable without estimating the states of any other nodes. The script `separate_root_est_accuracy.R` compares the accuracies of the root states estimate by this method vs when using the marginal strategy, which estimates the ancestral states for all the nodes in the tree at once.

## SSE models
### BiSSE
Navigate to the `asr_phyddle/sse/bisse_stat_q` directory. 
Then, run the phyddle analyses. 
```
phyddle -s SFTEP 
```
The scripts for the Bayesian analyses are found in the directory `bayes`. 
```
# Creates the input files
./mkNexus.sh

# Runs the analyses in parallel
./runRbParallel.sh

# Checks for convergence
R convergence.R

# Combines results in a csv file
./parseOutput.sh
```
The RevBayes path in `runSetRb.sh` may need to be updated to match the location of the `rb` executable. 

The simple estimator from the supplement, which estimates the ancestral state of a node to be the state that is most frequent in its descendants, can be reproduced with `infer_by_daughter.R`. 

The final plots can be reproduced with `height_plot.R`.

### GeoSSE 
Navigate to the `asr_phyddle/sse/geoSSE` directory. 
Then, run the phyddle analyses. 
This will take longer run than the other phyddle analyses since 5 times as many datasets are generated and used for the neural network training. 
Additionally, there are more possible states at each internal node. 
```
phyddle -s SFTEP 
```

To run the RevBayes analyses, navigate to the `asr_phyddle/sse/geoSSE/bayes` directory.
As before, the path to the `rb` executable may need to be modified in the `runSetRb.sh` file. 
This was run using a branch of `rb` (commit 6a276d) and TensorPhylo (commit 8887a4).
```
# Creates the input files
./mkNexus.sh

# Runs the analyses in parallel
./runRbParallel.sh

# Processes the output and creates a confusion matrix
./makeSummary.sh
```

The figures can be recreated using `confusion_avg.R` and `histogram_by_state.R`. 

## Empirical Analysis
### Liolaemus
Within the `liolaemus` directory, the Bayesian analyses can be run with the following commands.
```
# Format the input files
./prepPhy.sh

# Run two replicate MCMCs in RevBayes
./runRb.sh
```
The RevBayes script was run with an older version of RevBayes (commit 6a276d) and TensorPhylo (commit 8887a4), and will not run with the latest version. 

To run the phyddle analyses, navigate to the `phyddle` directory within the `liolaemus` directory. Then run the following script to run phyddle.

```
./runPhyddle.sh
```
The plot can be recreated with `plot_tree.R`.

### Ebola 
To prepare the empirical data files for phyddle, within the `SIRM/empirical` run the following, 
```
./.prepareInput.sh 
```
This will add node labels to the original tree and subsample the tree. 
It also formats the tip states for phyddle.

The Ebola analyses used MASTER to simulate with a SIR + migration model. MASTER is slower than the other simulation methods used in this manuscript, and simulation of 500,000 trees will take hours or days, in part depending on how many cores are available. The entire analysis can be run with the following command. This will run 5 trainings instead of the typical single network training. 

```
./runMutipleTrain.sh
```

The plot can be recreated with `plot_both_panels.R`.
